
1. A	is a place where two or more
parts of a skeleton meet.
2.  How might an endoskeleton affect the size of an animal?
3. Sequence Describe how your muscles work to help you kick a ball.
7. An animal that moves using a water vascular system is a
A) sea star.	
B) penguin.
C) squid.	
D) shark.
8. What are three reasons why an animal might need to move about?
9. Write a paragraph in which you describe a different adaptation that rabbits, bats, and snakes each have that enables them to move as they do.
4. A signal that causes an animal to react in some way is called a
A) response.	
B) neuron.
C) stimulus.	
D) impulse.
5. The most complex nervous systems have a nerve cord and a
6. Interpret Diagrams Explain the stimulus in diagram A and the response in diagram B.
10. Animals that eat only plant material are
A) omnivores.	
B) filter feeders.
C) carnivores.	
D) herbivores.
11. The process of breaking down food into small molecules is called
12. What type of teeth would you expect an omnivore to have? How do they help the animal eat its food?
13. The process in which an animal's cells use oxygen and digested food molecules to release the energy in food is
A) breathing.	
B) cellular respiration.
C) diffusion.	
D) gas exchange.
14. Describe three structures that an animal's respiratory system may have. Name one animal that has each structure.
20. Why is parental care so
important for newborn birds and mammals?
15. External fertilization is common for organisms that live in
A) trees.	
B) water.
C) deserts.	
D) open fields.
16. The  	is an immature
form of an organism that looks very different from the adult.
17. Consider the following 4, statement: Organisms that reproduce
.	asexually are at a higher risk of extinction than
organisms that reproduce sexually. Do you agree or disagree? Explain your answer.
18. Which of the following organisms lays amniotic eggs?
A) fish	
B) insect
C) turtle	
D) rabbit
19. How is the development of an embryo in an amniotic egg and in a placental mammal different?
21. Suppose this ostrich's nervous system was not receiving signals properly. How might it be dangerous for the ostrich?
4. Based on the type of teeth you see in the diagram below, make an inference about what type of animal it is.
1. Which is true of the endoskeleton of a mammal?
A) It grows with the animal.
B) It molts as the animal grows. 
C) It does not have hard parts.
D) It is mostly cartilage.

A) omnivore	
B) herbivore
C) carnivore	
D) filter feeder
2. The larval form of the frog shown in stage 3 is called a
A) nymph.	
B) pupa.
C) tadpole.	
D) adult. 
5. Animals with nerve nets have
A) no specialized neurons.
B) sensory neurons, but no interneurons. 
C) interneurons, but no sensory neurons.
D) only motor neurons.
3. An amniotic egg is the result of and
A) asexual reproduction; external fertilization
B) asexual reproduction; internal fertilization 
C) sexual reproduction; external fertilization
D) sexual reproduction; internal fertilization 

6. Describe how the mouse's nervous system
is functioning in this diagram. Include the roles of the sensory neurons, interneurons, and motor neurons.
The male seahorse's brood pouch expands as the baby seahorses grow.
