
































I=
Design It Plan an exhibit of Sierra's findings. What
would people want to know and see? Make a brochure advertising your exhibit ar develop a presentation of the fossils found at Boca Ciega Millennium Park.
In early 2007, sixteen-year-old Sierra Sarti-Sweeney went for a walk at Boca
- Ciega Millennium Park in Seminole, Florida. She wanted to take some nature pictures. She did not expect to stumble
on a mammoth!
During her walk, Sierra noticed bones in a stream bed. With her older brother, Sean, she brought the bones to local scientists. The bone Sierra found was the tooth of a prehistoric Columbian mammoth. Archaeologists say that the tooth and other fossils Sierra found could be as much as 100,000 years old!
Since Sierra's find, digging at the site has uncovered even more bones, including those from prehistoric camels, 2-meter turtles, and saber-toothed cats. According to scientists, the findings suggest that this part of Florida was once like the African savanna region.
For Sierra, the experience was exciting. She even had a call from a late-night television host. Finding the tooth confirmed Sierra's desire to be a zoologist and to keep looking at the world around her.
In the giant ice cap at the South Pole, a continuous record of snow exists reaching back more than 800,000 years. Scientists have drilled 3.2 kilometers down into the ice. From the cores they pull up, scientists learn about the temperature and the different gases in the air when each layer was formed.
These cores show that temperatures go up and down in cycles. Long ice ages (about 90,000 years) follow short warm periods (about 10,000 years). The climate record also shows that temperatures and amounts of carbon dioxide change together. If carbon dioxide levels rise,
_I	•
Research It Find at least three sources that explain the ice cores project. Write an essay critiquing the
explanations provided. Note any bias, misinformation, or missing information.
This man is repairing a wind turbine at a wind farm in Texas. Most wind turbines are at least 30 meters off the ground
where the winds are fast. Wind speed
and blade length help determine the
best way to capture the wind and turn it into power. Develop Hypotheses Why
do you think people are working to increase the amount of power we get from wind?
