



























 





















An old problem has resurfaced in Arizona and New Mexico. The Navajo homeland in this region rests on one of the richest uranium reserves in the United States. Uranium mining in this area first began in the 1950s and stopped in the 1970s. When the
mining companies left, many of them did not remove radioactive waste or seal the mine tunnels. This has greatly affected the health of the Navajo people who live and work near the old mines.
Years later, mining companies have come back to the Navajo homeland and the area around it. This time, they want to use solution mining, which uses water to flush out the uranium ore. This method is less dangerous than underground mining, but it can still contaminate the groundwater. And because the area is mostly desert, mining could use up scarce water.
Uranium is used for fuel in nuclear reactors that generate electricity. These reactors do not add carbon to the atmosphere, so some people think we should use them, instead of coal-fired power plants, to meet our electricity needs. The Navajo who live in an area with both coal and uranium must try to make decisions that will be good for their community both in the present and in the future.
Research It Working in a group, research (a) the uses of uranium, (b) the environmental impact of uranium mining, (c) the effect mining has had on the Navajo people's health, and (d) the effect mining has had on Navajo
communities, environment, and people. As a group, write a paper weighing
the costs and benefits of using solution mining to extract uranium ore.
While minerals form part of Earth's crust, they do not simply stay there until somebody picks them up. The minerals that make up Earth's crust are made up of elements that living things need, such as calcium. Over time, the minerals containing elements dissolve in water. Elements become part of our food because vegetables absorb them from the soil. When we eat the vegetables, we also take in the elements.
Calcium is one of the most important elements for your body because it helps build strong bones and teeth. It can be found in dairy products like milk, yogurt, and cheese, as well as broccoli and canned salmon.
Iron helps transport oxygen from your lungs to the rest of your body, and helps form red blood cells. Beef, tuna, eggs, and whole wheat bread are great sources of iron.
Potassium helps your muscles and nervous system work properly. Bananas, tomatoes, oranges, potatoes with skins, and peanuts are rich in potassium.
Zinc helps your immune system stay strong. A healthy immune system helps you fight off illnesses and infections. Zinc can be found in pork, lamb,
beans, and lentils.
Design it Plan one day's worth of meals (breakfast, lunch, dinner). Include as many foods rich in essential elements as possible in your plan.
You may think that Earth's crust is one huge, solid piece. In fact, Earth's surface is broken into several pieces—like a cracked eggshell. One of the cracks runs through the middle of this lake in Iceland.
Infer Why do you think this crack in Earth's crust might get wider?
