















en som- •n- - -- •
Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), you might think of missions to Mars or Pluto. However, many of NASA's missions help us understand our own planet. In 2004, NASA launched Aura, the third satellite in its Earth Observing System (EOS) program. Aura helps scientists study the chemistry of the atmosphere.
The Aura mission seeks to answer three questions about our atmosphere.
1. Is the ozone layer recovering? Aura helps scientists monitor atmospheric gases, such as chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), that affect the ozone layer. If the ozone layer does not recover, scientists predict that we will need to learn to better protect ourselves from the sun. In the next 10 years, will we need SPF 100 sunscreen?
2. How do pollutants affect air quality? Aura monitors levels of ozone, particulate matter, carbon monoxide, nitrogen dioxide, and sulfur dioxide. The data help scientists understand-and predict-the movement of air pollutants. Are attempts to reduce air pollution working?
3. How is Earth's climate changing? Aura checks levels of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere to help scientists build more accurate models of climate change. This way, we will have a better idea of how to plan for long-term climate change. Will you need to invest in a really good raincoat?
It Research NASA's EOS program. What are the major satellites in this program, Which Earth systems are they designed
to monitor?
ro opnitgm m
orra?Whaade Make a	ia
eriesdhisapsthye
EOS	with
information and pictures to show what you
find out.
_
Bobbing along in the skha it balloons
400114
look like a fun way to spe a day. Before the invention of satellites or airplanes, though, scientists used hot air balloons to study the atmosphere. Riding in their balloons, scientists recorded air temperatures and humidity, and even gathered information about cosmic
rays. For more than 150 years, balloons were cutting-edge atmospheric observatories.
Research It Find out more about thelli\'' \%,:
history of ballooning. How did scientific_	
research using balloons contribute to ___ early space missions? Make a timeline :-'-'---- ..
showing balloonists' discoveries.	- --------
--____.--
It's windy up there! About 10 kilometers above Earth's surface, the jet stream winds blow constantly. The winds average 80 to 160 km/h, and they can reach 400 km/h. If we could harness just a small fraction of the wind's energy, we could meet the electricity needs of everyone on Earth!
Scientists are testing designs for high-altitude wind farms. They propose that kite-like wind generators flying above Earth could generate electricity. Cables could then transfer the electricity to Earth.
Design It Research the proposed designs for wind farms in the sky. Make a graphic organizer to show the proposed designs, the risks, and the ways scientists are addressing these risks.
How do meteorologists predict the weather?
This tornado bearing down on this home in Kansas in June of 2004 reached wind speeds of 254-331 km/h. The state of Kansas had 124 tornadoes that year. Although tornadoes can occur anywhere, the United States leads the world with more than 1,000 tornadoes per year.
Observe How could you predict a tornado was coming?
