






























When engineers had to build a new elevated highway for the San Francisco—Oakland Bay Bridge, they had a lot of things to worry about. After all, if you're going to spend more than 1 billion dollars upgrading a bridge, you want to make sure it will be around for a long time!
The supports of the bridge needed to stand in salt water and mud. Chemicals called sulfates in salt water and soil can weather the concrete and weaken the structure. Sulfates also cause weathering by allowing salt crystals to form on the bridge. But when fly ash is mixed into concrete, it protects the concrete against the weathering effects of the sulfates. Fly ash is powder left behind after coal has been burned. This waste product is usually dumped in landfills.
The engineers of the huge concrete elevated highway used a mixture of concrete and
fly ash to build the bridge supports. This improved concrete is helping the bridge to stand up to everything nature throws its way.
crjrzi) Identify how weathering has
affected a local site, such as a bridge or a monument. Find out what materials were used to build the site, and research what other materials might better withstand
weathering. Write a paragraph making the case for using these different materials in future building projects.
Even as a young boy, George Washington Carver understood plants. Born into slavery in the 1860s, Carver spent his days studying plants. He observed that some plants needed a lot of sunlight and some needed very little. He experimented with mixtures of sand, soil, and clay to find out the kind of soil each plant needed. He knew so much about plants, neighbors called him the "plant doctor."
Carver received a master of science degree from Iowa State Agricultural College and began to teach and do research at Tuskegee Institute. Because Southern farmers grew only cotton, their soil was in poor condition and had started to erode. Carver taught farmers that crop rotation would enrich the soil. Many farmers found that the crops Carver suggeste• grew better in their soil, and that his methods made the soil healthier. Crop rotation is now a common farming technique.
Dr. Carver inspecting plants in a research greenhouse 111.
Research It Dr. Carver taught farmers in the South to plant peanuts, sweet potatoes, and soybeans. The success of these crops often left farmers with more than they could use or sell. Research the many uses discovered by Dr. Carver for one of these crops and present them in a poster.
What processes shape the surface of the land?
Smooth and colorful, the sandstone walls of Antelope Canyon look more like a sculpture than like natural rock. Located in Arizona, this slot canyon was carved by nature. From above, the opening of the canyon is so narrow that you can jump across. But be careful, some areas of the canyon are more than 30 meters deep!
1,-$1,f How could nature have carved these rocks?
