



























On November 15,1963,
out from the icy ses,off the seuth coast of Iceland, spewing gigintic clouds of ash,
A new island, Surtsoy, formed, A volcanic
eruption began 130 rooters under the sea and forced volcanic Ash tuthe surtete. Eventually, the layers of lava andh formed a volcanic cone that rose above sea le 1--ths§ birth of Surtsey,
13.
Eruptions continued fo early four years as steady flows of lava alt) d outward and cooled in the tee, By the end, Surtsey had an area
of 2.7 square kilometers,
It takes a long time for a iih,v island to cool down! At the very base of he island, water flows through layers of loos) rocks, When It makes contact with the extremely hot magma chamber deep under the sea, the water evaporates, Steam travels through the layers of porous rock at the base of the island, heating the island up,
To protect Surtsey's environment, the
government of Iceland Allows tidy a handful of scientists to visit the delicate new environment, Surtsey Is a natural laboratory that gives
scientists valuable Information on how plant and animal populations begin on a volcanic island.
Cir--:--3 The arrival of living things on Surtsey is an example of primary succession. Research the organisms that live on Surtsey, or
in another area of newly formed lava rock. Make a storyboard showing primary succession on Surtsey or on the area you have researched.
Volcanologists have a seriously hot job.
They investigate how, where, and when volcanoes all over the world erupt. You might find a volcanologist studying on the slopes
of Mount St. Helens in Washington State,	-
or investigating the crater of Krakatoa in Indonesia. They also try to predict eruption, ,
Volcanologists have to take safety very seriously—after all, they work around active erupting volcanoes! They have to watch out for volcanic gases and landslides. Volcanology is not all about adventures in the field, though. Volcanologists study Earth sciences, math, and physics in order to understand what they observe in the field. They also spend time writing about what they learn, so that other people can learn from their research.
.	•
Research It Research the history of a volcano that has been studied by volcanologists. Based on your research, describe how the volcano has erupted and try to predict if and when it might erupt again.
Scientists once believed that explosive volcanic eruptions could not happen deep under water. Instead, they
thought, lava seeped slowly from undersea volcanoes.
But in 2008, scientitt§ found jagged pieces of glassy volcanic rock around undersea volcanoes in the Petit Otean. Seeping lava does not cause jagged glassy rocks, Explosive eruptions do,
The Gakkel Ridge Is a long crack In the floor of the Arctic Ocean, The two sides of the crack are spreading apart slowly, As a result, gas builds up in pockets of magma beneath the ridge, iventually the pressure of this gas causes explosive volcanic eruptions: The eruptions release lava, heat, gases, and trace metals Into the ocean water, The jagged rocks that scientists found came from these explosions.
The Gakkel Ridge (in red) is located under the Arctic Ocean.
Research it Research volcanic activity along another mid-ocean ridge, such as the Juan de Fuca Ridge. Prepare a graphic organizer comparing the timing, intensity, and volcanic activities along the two mid-ocean ridges.
What could make a rock so full of holes? These rock formations, called tafoni, are found along the coast of California at Salt Point State Park.
Develop Hypotheses Explain what you think caused the holes in these rock formations.
