









































The GOSAT satellite's mission is to record the concentration of greenhouse gases on Earth. V




Our planet has gas. In fact, it is surrounded by gas. Satellites help us measure this gassy envelope.
Specifically, these satellites measure greenhouse gases. The Japanese satellite GOSAT was launched on January 23, 2009. Its main job is to measure the levels of two
major greenhouse gases-carbon dioxide (CO2) and methane (CH4). Watching changes in the concentrations of these gases all over the world will help scientists learn about climate change.
Scientists already use 282 land-based observation sites, but GOSAT will gather data from 56,000 locations! In 44 orbits, GOSAT will map all of Earth every three days. GOSAT will also record greenhouse gas concentrations over remote areas like the ocean and help every country keep track of its greenhouse gas emissions.
As Earth gets gassier, satellites are helping us get a clearer picture.
Researchje The levels of CO2 have been increasing, but not all scientists agree on the best solutions for reducing CO2 emissions. Research different ways of reducing or combating greenhouse gas emissions, and participate in a class debate about the costs and benefits of different approaches.
Could bacteria influence the weather? Some scientists think that some bacteria can! Researchers have found rainmaking bacteria in samples of rainwater throughout the world. These bacteria are also found in the clouds that produce rain.
The cycle that carries bacteria from
Earth to the clouds and back, known as bioprecipitation, begins at Earth's surface. The bacteria reproduce on the leaves of plants, often damaging their hosts. Then wind currents carry the bacteria high into the atmosphere. If conditions are right, water vapor freezes on the bacteria, forming rain. Rain carries the bacteria back to Earth's surface and the bioprecipitation cycle repeats.
Understanding the role of bacteria in weather patterns could be important for predicting or even preventing droughts. In the future, scientists may be able to increase the chance of rain by seeding clouds with rainmaking bacteria.
Research It Find out more about bioprecipitation. Make a presentation that shows how rainmaking bacteria may influence weather patterns as part of their life cycle.
Rainmaking bacteria, carried into the atmosphere by Earth's winds, may play a role in Earth's patterns of rain and drought.
How do Earth, the moon,
and the sun interact?
This photograph shows a series of images of the moon taken over the course of an evening. Why do you think the moon looks different in each image?
Develop Hypotheses Explain what you think happened during the period of time shown in the photograph.
