




































This sun stone is sometimes called the Aztec calendar. It shows the 20 days in the Aztec month. The Aztec calendar was a solar calendar, with a total of 365 days in a year.




What day of the week is your birthday this year? Better check the calendar.
Calendars were invented to keep track of important events, such as planting schedules and festivals.
Early people noticed certain patterns in nature. The seasons change. The sun rises and sets. The moon changes phases. These patterns became the basis for calendars even before people understood that Earth rotates on an axis and revolves around the sun or that the moon revolves around Earth.
Calendars were lunar (based on the moon), solar (based on the sun), or lunisolar (based on a combination). But none was completely accurate—important events shifted around from one year to the next.
The Gregorian calendar, introduced in 1582, is the standard calendar in use today. It is more accurate than most calendars, but even it requires some tinkering. We add an extra day almost every four years, giving us a leap year. Century years (like 2000) are not leap years unless they are divisible by 400.
Research It There are about 40 different kinds of calendars in use today. Pick one and research it. Write an essay describing the calendar and how it is different from the Gregorian calendar. What does the calendar tell you about the society that uses it?
Do you have any space gadgets in your home? You almost certainly do. The scientists and engineers who have worked on the space program have developed thousands of new materials and devices for use in space. Many of those items are useful on Earth as well. An item that has uses on Earth but was originally developed for use in space is called a space spinoff.
Space spinoffs include many new materials, as well as devices used in consumer products and medical technology. Here are some examples:
Research It Research space spinoffs developed throughout the history of the space
...ram. Design an illustrated displays the five
are
Why are objects in the solar system different from each other?
This photograph from the Cassini space probe shows Saturn and part of its magnificent system of rings. Space probes such as Cassini have helped scientists learn more about the objects in the solar system.
Infer What do you think Saturn's rings are made of? How might they have formed?
