








































An ecosystem includes all the plants, animals, and nonliving resources in a given area. The organisms interact with each other and with all the nonliving components of their ecosystem. The flow of nutrients and energy through food chains and food webs is part of how the organisms and nonliving materials interact. But when did plastic-a nonliving, chemical-based, human-made material-enter the food chain?
Only since the 1940s have plastics become part of our everyday life. Today, large numbers of plastic bags, bottles, caps, and other trash end up in streams, rivers, ponds, landfills, and the ocean. Researchers exploring the remotest areas of Antarctica and the deepest sea trenches have found plastic litter and fragments!
Scientists have identified over 180 species that ingest plastic debris. Birds, fish, crustaceans, turtles, mollusks, plankton, and marine mammals are most susceptible to ingesting different-sized pieces of plastic, from large to microscopic. Many more species are at risk of absorbing harmful chemicals that have leached from plastics. Plastic debris may remain undigested inside an animal-filling the stomach or blocking
digestive passages, and contributing to illness or even starvation.
Organisms may also be choked or injured by getting tangled
in plastic bags or strapping.
Mode It Research how waste plastics spread and build up in different ecosystems and in the food chain. Make models of two ecosystems in different locations, comparing and contrasting the organisms
in each model that plastic waste may affect. Suggest ways that humans can keep plastics out of the world's environments.
When you have a fever, it may last a day or two. But when Earth's atmosphere has a rising temperature, what can be done to reverse it? If the average global
atmospheric temperature rises even a few degrees, it could cause major disruptions in climate patterns around the world. This could have devastating effects on the environment and on society.
Greenhouse gases enter the atmosphere both naturally and from human activities. But since the Industrial Revolution, industrial growth-driven by demand from increasing population and development-has caused more and more greenhouse gases, especially CO2, to enter the atmosphere.
Where does all the CO2 come from? There are many sources, but the largest has been the burning of fossil fuels-coal, oil, and natural gas. The possibility of major climate changes highlights the importance of developing other fuel sources to power our vehicles, homes, farms, and industries.
CO2 Emissions From Fossil Fuel Combustion
Debate It Does driving or riding in an electric vehicle help reduce carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases in the atmosphere? Vehicles that burn nonrenewable fossil fuels are the second largest contributor of CO,
to the atmosphere. But up to 70 percent of the electricity in the U.S. is also produced by the burning of fossil fuels. Research more
about this question and participate in a class debate about whether switching to electric vehicles can help reduce CO2 emissions.
se these star charts to locate bright stars and lajor constellations in the night sky at different mes of year. Choose the appropriate star chart )1- the current season.
Autumn Sky This chart works best at the following dates and times: September 1 at 10:00 P.M., October 1 at 8:00 P.M., or
November 1 at 6:00 P.M. Look for the constellations Ursa Minor (the Little Dipper) and Cassiopeia in the northern sky, and for the star Deneb, which is nearly overhead in autumn.
Winter Sky This chart works best at the following dates and times: December 1 at
10:00 P.M., January 1 at 8:00 P.M., or February 1 at 6:00 P.M. Look for the constellations Orion and Gemini; the bright star Sirius; and the Pleiades, a star cluster, in the winter sky.
