















	

	



It's hard to say who are the bigger heroes in the Chesapeake Bay-the scientists or the oysters.
The Chesapeake Bay is the world's third-largest estuary. More than 17 million people live within the Chesapeake watershed. For many years, fishing has been an important industry for people in the area. People depend on the bay for food and work. Pollution and habitat loss in the watershed have dramatically reduced marine life i the bay, and people who live and work there have found it more difficult to find food or earn a living.
Now, scientists and volunteers are using oysters to help clean the bay's waters. Oysters get their food by filtering plankton and other nutrients from the water. In this way, oysters help remove pollutants from the water. The oyster population has fallen sharply in recent years, and there are not enough oysters to keep up with the pollution. The Chesapeake Bay Foundation is hoping to restock the bay with 31 million oysters in the next 10 years. If they succeed, other marine life may also return to the bay.
Research It Make a map that shows the Chesapeake Bay watershed and the major rivers that drain into it. On the map, indicate how freshwater pollutants, such as excess fertilizer, enter the bay. Write a paragraph explaining
the impact on society if the pollution is allowed to continue.
Archaeologists use computer-generated images to show what
the 2,000-year-old irrigation system might have looked like when it was built.
Archaeologists from the University of Cincinnati have made a startling discovery. They had thought that
a 2,000-year-old ruin on a hilltop in southwestern Ohio was a fort used by the Shawnee people native to the region to defend their lands from attack. Recently, however, archaeologists have found evidence that
the ruin was actually a complex system of dams and canals, stretching almost 6 kilometers! At one spot, the Shawnee constructed a dam nearly 61 meters high!
The Shawnee built the system to collect water from a series of springs and to transport it to farmland, so that they could grow enough food to support their society. Climate records suggest that 2,000 years ago, when the Shawnee built the system, the region was colder and drier than it is now. So moving water from its source to where it was needed for farming would
have helped the Shawnee survive.
Design It Find out more about water management systems used by ancient civilizations such as the Maya. Make a presentation that compares how two different civilizations used natural resources. Explain how the climate each group faced may have affected its
water management systems.
Archaeologists sift carefully through dirt removed from the site of the Fort Miami water works.
Imagine yourself lazily soaring like a bird above Earth. The quiet, gentle winds and warm sun are so relaxing. No noisy engine, no flapping wings, but wait, what's keeping you aloft? Everyone knows that humans can't fly.
Develop Hypotheses How does this hang glider fly?
