









	















Scientists can't see them, but they keep studying them. For years, astronomers have known that black holes exist. The extreme gravity of a black hole allows nothing to escape, not even light. So astronomers need to use some pretty high-powered tools to study them.
Astronomers use data from space telescopes to measure the visible light, X-rays, and radio waves emitted from objects near a black hole. Astronomers have used this data to learn a lot about black holes. They know that black holes come in two main sizesstellar-sized, formed when massive stars collapse inward, and supermassive.
Supermassive black holes are found in the center of galaxies. The gravity from the black hole helps bind the stars, star systems, star clusters, dust, and gas into a galaxy.
atu ate ._l, Black holes are often described in movies and science fiction novels. Find one example of a black hole in a novel, graphic novel, TV show, or movie. Write an essay that explains how the black hole is described in your sources. Evaluate the source's scientific accuracy, and correct any inaccurate information.
4 This image of two galaxies colliding was taken by the Hubble Space Telescope in 2008. Astronomers believe that supermassive black holes are at the center of galaxies.
Kids in the Boston area have their heads in the stars. At least the lucky ones do. They're part of the Youth Astronomy Apprenticeship (YAA) program run by four
astronomical and educational institutions in the area.
The goal of YAA is to give urban kids more exposure to astronomers and astronomy. In after-school programs, apprentices learn many things, including how to understand and interpret images from a network of telescopes students control online, and how to prepare the images to illustrate their own research. In Stage 2 of the
program, apprentices can go on to a summer apprentice program. In the summer program, participants are paid to help make museum exhibits and perform science and astronomy plays. Participants also help teach other people about the universe. Some students go on to become youth assistants, teaching the next group of young stargazers.
Are the apprentices "star-struck"? The YAA program hopes they are.
Design It Choose a topic in astronomy that interests you. Working with a partner, prepare an exhibit about that topic. Prese your exhibit to members of your school community.
What can people do to use resources wisely?
Have you ever thought of ways to reuse something you would normally throw away? This home is made from the shipping containers you see transporting goods on ships and trucks. These containers would have been thrown away but an architect thought of a new way to use them.
Infer How can reusing shipping containers and other objects help our planet?
