







ybrid engines, windmills, low-impact this, ternative-energy that—everywhere you look, eople are trying to find ways to create energy by
sing renewable resources. Sometimes, a technology :erns to conserve energy, but in reality it has hidden
•sts. For example, electric cars do not release air ollutants during use, but the method that is used
- generate the electricity for the car may cause 'ollution. Is the electricity really "clean"?
Evaluating the costs and benefits of different technologies is an important scientific skill. Use
e following questions to sharpen your decision' aking skills.
What materials are used to create or power the technology? How are they obtained?
What is produced when the technology is created or used? How do these products affect the environment? How are these products stored, recycled, or disposed of?
Does using a
technology encourage people to use more energy? If it does, do the benefits of the technology outweigh the environmental costs?
Every technology has costs and benefits. However, it is important to be able to evaluate new technologies to find out if the benefits outweigh the costs!
Write About It In a group, discuss the questions listed above. Can you think of ways to add to them or to change them? Then, create an Environmental
Decision-Making Guide and use it to evaluate two of the energy technologies described in this chapter.
Life on an Oil Rig
This professional's office is on a huge steel platform that is half the area of a football field, surrounded by water. With much of Earth's oil located under the ocean floor, petroleum engineers must go where the oil is. Many of them work on offshore oil rigs—large drilling platforms that extract oil from under the ocean floor.
Conditions far out in the the ocean can be harsh or dangerous. Large equipment, fires, and even hurricanes threaten workers' safety. However, far
out in the ocean, workers on oil rigs can see sharks, manta rays, and other marine life.
Petroleum engineers study geology, physics, and chemistry to understand the properties of rock formations that contain oil. They use high-tech remote sensing equipment to find oil and computer modeling software to figure out how to get the oil out of the ocean's floor.
Write About It Find out more about life on an offshore oil rig. Then, write a diary or blog entry that describes a week in the life of an offshore petroleum engineer.
Whirlpool! Maelstrom! Vortex! Do these words make you think of a rushing spiral of water, sucking fish and boats into its center? Not all vortexes sink ships. Fish and whales cause little vortexes when they swim. As the animals move, they create turbulence in the water. Turbulent water moves away from the animal and gives it a little push.
An engineer named Michael Bernitsas has developed a device that uses this effect to generate electricity. As currents push water around a cylindrical device,
a vortex forms. As the vortex moves away from the device, the cylinder moves up and down. The device then converts that mechanical energy into electrical energy. Bernitsas has even improved the device by adding mechanical "fish tails" to the generators! Bernitsas is still testing his system, but he hopes that it can someday be used to help meet society's needs for a renewable source of ever. .
Design It Find out more about how fish swim. Then, design a model that shows how the body of a fish moves in the water. In your model, show where a vortex would form as the fish swims.
Watch out below! This river is carrying the kayaker straight down. But where did the water come from in the first place? Where is it going? And why is water important?
Develop Hypotheses Explain where you think the water in the river came from and where it will go next.
