Introduction to the
Human Body
Fara is learning how to build and fix bicycles. First, she learned to change a tire using a tire lever. This tool's structure —a lever with a curved end—matches its function —to pry a tire off a metal rim. She's also learning about the interactions between the different bike parts—how the chain, gears, wheels, and brakes all work together as a system.
An object's structure is its shape or form.
An object's function is the action it performs or the role it plays.
An interaction occurs when two or more things work together or affect one another.
A system is a group of parts that work together to perform a function or produce a result.
Suffix	Meaning	Example
-al	of, like, or suitable for	epithelial, adj. describes a tissue that
covers inner and outer surfaces of the body
-ive	of, relating to, belonging to,	connective, adj. describes a tissue that
having the nature or quality of	provides support for the body and
connects all of its parts
LESSON 1
•	cell • cell membrane • nucleus
•	cytoplasm • tissue
•	muscle tissue • nervous tissue
•	connective tissue
•	epithelial tissue • organ
•	organ system
'® Identify the Main Idea
^	Make Models
LESSON 2
•	skeleton • skeletal muscle • joint
•	nutrient • absorption • gland
•	stimulus • response • hormone 'a Summarize
•	Develop Hypotheses
LESSON 3
•	homeostasis • stress
'	Relate Cause and Effect
ZA Communicate
LESSON 4
•	skeleton • vertebrae • joint
•	ligament • compact bone
•	spongy bone • marrow
•	cartilage • osteoporosis
sa Summarize
•	Classify
LESSON 5
•	involuntary muscle
•	voluntary muscle
•	skeletal muscle • tendon
•	smooth muscle • cardiac muscle
•	striated muscle
"a Compare and Contrast
L_A Infer LESSON 6
•	epidermis • melanin • dermis
•	pore • follicle
'	Relate Cause and Effect
•	Observe
Body Organization
How Is Your Body Organized?
Communicate Answer the question below. Then discuss your answer with a partner.
Why do you think medical illustrations are important to the study of human biology?
Medical Illustrator
Who made the colorful drawings of human body structures in
this book? The drawings are the work of specialized artists
called medical illustrators. These artists use their drawing skills and knowledge of human biology to make detailed images of body
structures. Many artists draw images, such as the one on this page, using 3-D computer graphics. The work of medical illustrators appears in
textbooks, journals, magazines, videos, computer learning programs, and many other places.
How Is Your Body Organized?
The bell rings—lunchtime! You hurry to the cafeteria, fill your tray, and pay the cashier. You look around the cafeteria for your friends. Then you walk to the table, sit down, and begin to eat.
Think about how many parts of your body were involved in the simple act of getting and eating your lunch. Every minute of the day, whether you are eating, studying, walking, or even sleeping, your body is busily at work. Each part of the body has a specific job to do. And all these different parts usually work together so smoothly that you don't even notice them.
FIGURE 1 	
Body Organization
You will see this diagram three more times in this lesson. It will help you track the levels of organization in the body.
Name Fill in the missing terms in the diagram above.
The smooth functioning of your body is due
partly to how the body is organized. kt,Zi The levels
of organization in the human body consist of cells,
tissues, organs, and organ systems. The smallest unit of organization is a cell. The next largest unit is a tissue,
then an organ. Finally, an organ system is the largest unit of organization in an organism. Figure 1 shows body organization.
Cells A cell is the basic unit of structure and function in a living thing. Complex organisms are made up of many cells in the same way that your school is made up of many rooms. The human body contains about 100 trillion tiny cells. Most cells cannot be seen without a microscope.
Structures of Cells Almost all cells in the human body have the same basic parts, as shown in Figure 2. The cell membrane forms the outside border of a cell. The nucleus directs the cell's activities and holds information that controls a cell's function. The rest of the cell, called the cytoplasm (sYT oh plaz um), is made of a clear,
jellylike substance that contains many cell structures. Each of these structures has a specific job, or function.
Functions of Cells Cells carry on the processes that keep organisms alive. Inside cells, for example, molecules from digested food undergo changes that release energy that the cells can use. Cells also grow, reproduce, and get rid of the waste products that result from these activities.
FIGURE 2 	
Cell Structure
A microscope reveals some of the parts of a human cheek cell.
Choose the best description of the structure and function of a tissue.
OA group of different cells that have the same function
OA group of similar cells that
have different functions
OA group of similar cells that have the same functioliiiik
Tissues The next largest unit of organization in your body is a tissue. A tissue is a group of similar cells that perform the same function. Your body contains several types of tissue. Four of these are muscle tissue, nervous tissue, connective tissue,
and epithelial tissue. You can see examples in the
photos at left.
Like the muscle cells that form it, muscle tissue
can contract, or shorten. By doing so, muscle tissue
makes parts of your body move. While muscle
tissue carries out movement, nervous tissue
directs and controls the process. Nervous
tissue carries electrical messages back and forth between the brain and other parts of the body.
Another type of tissue, connective tissue, provides support for your body and
connects all its parts. Bone tissue and fat tissue are examples of connective tissue.
Epithelial tissue (ep uh THEE lee ul)
covers the surfaces of your body, inside
Lnd out. Some epithelial tissue, such as
your skin, protects the delicate structures
that lie beneath it. The lining of your
digestive system consists of epithelial
tissue that allows you to digest and
absorb the nutrients in your food.
FIGURE 3
The Heart
The heart, like your other organs, is made of different kinds of tissues that have different functions.
Answer the following questions.
1. Relate Text and Visuals In each box, fill in the kind of tissue that matches the function described.
2.=Pick one type of tissue shown and describe how the -----CHALLENGE heart would be affected if the tissue did not function properly.
provides strength and flexible support for muscle tissue
and other structures inside and outside the heart.
Organs Your stomach, heart, brain, and lungs are all organs. An organ is a structure that is made up of different kinds of tissue. Like a tissue, an organ performs a specific job. The job of an organ, however, is usually more complex than that of a tissue. For example, the heart pumps blood through your body over and over
again. The heart contains muscle, connective, and epithelial tissues. In addition, nervous tissue connects to the heart and helps control
heart function. Figure 3 shows a diagram of a human heart and
describes how some of the heart's tissues work. Each type of
tissue contributes in a different way to the organ's job
of pumping blood.
covers the inside surfaces of the heart and of the blood vessels that lead into and out of the heart.
carries electrical messages from the brain to the heart but is not shown in this diagram.
contracts, squeezing the heart so blood moves through the heart's chambers and then into blood vessels that lead to the body.
Books are a nonliving model of levels of organization. Find out how a book is organized.
STEP 0 Observe Examine this book to see how its chapters, lessons, and other parts are related.
STEP @ __Make Models Next, compare levels of organization in this book to those in the human body. Draw lines to show which part of this book best models a level in the body.
Organism	Lessons
Organ systems	Book
Organs	Words
Tissues	Chapters
Cells	Paragraphs
.lake Models Where in the book model do you think this Apply It fits? What level of organization in the body does the Apply It represent?
FIGURE 4	
a=$M1 Body Systems
\., Apply Concepts Describe the levels of organization in a complex system. Write about a sports team, a supermarket, a digital audio player, or an orchestra. Or choose your own example.
Systems Each organ in your body is part of an organ system, which is a group of
organs that work together, carrying out major functions. For example, your heart is part of your circulatory system, which carries oxygen and other materials throughout your body. The circulatory system also includes blood vessels and blood. Figure 4 shows most of the organ systems in the human body.
Organisms Starting with cells, the levels of organization in an organism become more and more complex. A tissue is more complex than a cell, an organ is more complex than a tissue, and so on. You, as an organism, are the next level of organization. And all organisms are part of levels of organization within the environment.
la. Review How are cells, tissues, and organs related?
b. Infer What systems of the body are involved in preparing and eating a sandwich?
c. Make Judgments How does learning about body systems help you make informed decisions about your health?
the body's levels of organization, from least complex to most complex, are
System Interactions
How Do You Move?
Which Systems Move Materials in Your Body? Which Systems Control Body Functions?
Do you hear in color?
What color is the letter b or the roar of a tiger?
You might not see colors when you hear
sounds, but some people do. In people with .ynesthesia (sin us THEE zhuh), their senses overlap. Some people with synesthesia may taste a shape or hear music in colors. Others may hear a sound when they see motion. Even people without synesthesia experience some connections between heir senses. You can explore how your
own senses overlap in the first question on this page.
Communicate Answer the questions and then discuss your answers with a partner.
1. Look at the shapes below. One of them is called kiki and the other bouba. Which name do you think matches each shape?
2. Most people call the rounded shape bouba and the pointed shape kiki. Why do you think that is?
How Do You Move?
Carefully coordinated movements let you thread a needle, ride a bicycle, brush your teeth, and dance. These movements—and all of your body's other movements—happen as a result of the interactions between body systems. Your muscular system is made up of all the muscles in your body. Your skeletal system, or skeleton, includes all the bones in your body. C;2 Muscles and bones work together, making your body move. The nervous system tells your muscles when to act.
Muscles and Bones Skeletal muscles are attached to the bones of your skeleton and provide the; force that moves your bones. Muscles
contract and relax. When a muscle contracts, it shortens and pulls on the bones to which it is attached, as showni
in Figure 1.
_Aevelop Hypotheses An octopus has no bones. Explain how you think it moves.
FIGURE 1 	
Muscles Moving Bones
As this dancer's muscles pull on his leg bones, he can make rapid, skillful moves.
"fa Summarize In your own
words, describe which of your systems work together when you write in this book.
Bones and Joints What happens when you wiggle your fingers or touch your toes? Even though your bones are rigid, your body can bend in many ways. Your skeleton bends at its joints. A joint is a place in the body where two bones come together. For example, your elbow and your shoulder are two joints that move when you raise your hand.
Making Movement Happen Muscles make bones move at their joints. Try standing on one leg and bending the other leg at the knee. Hold that position. You can feel that you are using the muscles at the back of your thigh. Now straighten your leg. You can feel the muscles in the back of your leg relax, but the muscles
in the front of your leg are at work. Your nervous system controls when and how your muscles act on your bones. You will read more about the nervous system later in this lesson.
Interpret Diagrams Circle three of the football player's joints.
Compare and Contrast Describe how your shoulder and elbow move in different ways.
© CHALLENGE From a standing position, bend down and grab your ankles. List six places or joints where your skeleton bends.
Now I know that	and	work together to make the body move.
Which Systems Move Materials
in Your Body?
The trillions of cells that make up your body need materials to function. Cells also produce wastes that must be removed. If the processes of moving these materials were made into a movie, your nervous system would be the director. The movie set would include the muscular and skeletal systems. And the main characters would be some of your other systems. a; The circulatory, respiratory, digestive, and excretory systems play key roles in moving materials in your body.
Transporting Materials Your circulatory
system includes your heart, blood vessels, and blood. Blood vessels are found throughout your body. Blood that flows through these vessels carries materials such as water, oxygen, and food to every cell, as shown in Figure 2. Materials that your cells must get rid of, such as carbon dioxide and other cell wastes, are also moved through the body in the blood.
FIGURE 2 	
ART IN MOTION The Body's Highway
Your circulatory system is like a set of roadways that carry materials to and
from cells.
Answer the following questions.
1. Identify Use the word bank to identify the materials that move between cells and the blood. Write the words on the arrows.
2. Predict How do you think a blocked blood vessel would affect cells?
FIGURE 3 	
Something in the Air
About 21 percent of air is oxygen gas. The rest is mainly nitrogen gas and small amounts of other gases.
Sequence Read about breathing in and breathing out. Then complete the steps above that describe the functions of the respiratory system by filling in the missing terms in the boxes.
Breathing In, Breathing Out
Can you imagine doing something more than 20,000 times a day? Without even realizing it, you already do. You breathe! You don't usually think about breathing, because this process
is controlled automatically by your nervous system. Breathing also depends on your muscular system. Muscles in your chest cause your chest area to expand and compress. These changes make air move in and out of your lungs.
When you breathe in, that breath of air goes into your lungs, which are part of your respiratory system. Oxygen from the air moves from your lungs into your bloodstream. Your respiratory and circulatory systems work together, delivering oxygen to all your cells. Your cells give off carbon dioxide as a waste product. Carbon dioxide is carried in the blood to the lungs, where you breathe it out. Review the functions of the respiratory system in Figure 3.
Getting Food Your respiratory system takes in oxygen, and your circulatory system delivers it to your cells. Oxygen is used in cells to release energy from sugar molecules that come from the food you eat. But how do sugar molecules get to your cells? Your digestive system helps to break down foods into sugars and other nutrient
molecules that your body can use. A nutrient is a substance that you get from food and that your body needs to carry out processes, such as contracting muscles. Through a process.
called absorption, nutrients move from the digestive system into the bloodstream. The circulatory system then delivers the nutrients to all the cells in your body. In this way, your digestive system and circulatory system work together to get food to your cells.
Moving Wastes The excretory system eliminates wastes from your body. Your respiratory, circulatory, and digestive systems all have roles in the excretory system. You already read that carbon dioxide passes from the circulatory system into the respiratory system and leaves the body when you exhale. Other cellular wastes also pass into the blood. These wastes are filtered out of the blood by the kidneys. This process produces urine, which then carries the wastes out of your body. Materials that are not used by the digestive system leave the body as solid waste.
Vocabulary Suffixes The names of three body systems contain the suffix -atory or -etory, which both mean "of, or pertaining to." Circle the name of each of these systems once in the text on this page. Then underline sentences that describe what these systems do.
la. List Name four body systems that are involved in getting oxygen to your cells.
c. Draw Conclusions How does the circulatory system help other systems function?
b. Explain How is absorption an important function of the digestive system?
v I know that materials are moved within my body by the _
Which Systems Control
Body Functions?
To function properly, each part of your body must be able to communicate with other parts of your body. For example, if you hear a phone ring, that message must be sent to your brain. Your brain then directs your muscles to move your bones so you can answer the phone. These actions are controlled by the nervous system, which is made up of the brain, spinal cord, and nerves. In your nervous system, information travels through nerve cells.
Other messages are sent by chemical signals that are produced by the endocrine system. The endocrine system is made up of organs called glands that release chemical signals directly into
the bloodstream. For example, when you exercise, your endocrine system sends signals that make you perspire, or sweat. As sweat evaporates, it helps you cool down. UM The nervous system and the endocrine system work together to control body functions.
Nervous System Your eyes, ears, skin, nose, and taste buds send information about your environment to your nervous system. Your senses let you react to bright light, hot objects, and freshly baked cookies. A signal in the environment that makes you react is called a stimulus (plural stimuli). A response is what your body does in reaction to a stimulus. Responses are directed by your nervous system but often involve other body systems. For example, your muscular and skeletal systems help you reach for a cookie. And your digestive
system releases saliva before the cookie even reaches your
FIGURE 4 	
Stimulus and Response
Have you ever been startled by something unexpected? . Use the pictures to complete these tasks.
1. Sequence Use numbers 1, 2, and 3 to put the pictures in order.
2. Explain Use the terms stimulus and response to explain what happened.
Among the drugs that affect the nervous system, caffeine is one of the most commonly used worldwide. Caffeine is found in coffee, tea, soda, other
beverages, and even in chocolate.
0 Explain How does caffeine reach the brain
after someone drinks a cup of coffee or tea? In your answer, be sure to identify the systems involved.
0 Infer Caffeine is addictive, which means that the body can become physically dependent on the drug. Which body
system do you think
would be most involved in an
addiction? Explain your answer.
Endocrine System The chemical signals released by the endocrine system are called hormones. Hormones are transported through your body by the circulatory system. These chemicals affect many body processes. For example, one hormone interacts with the excretory system and the circulatory system to control the amount of water in the bloodstream. Another hormone interacts with the digestive system and the circulatory system to control the amount of sugar in the bloodstream. Hormones also affect the reproductive systems of both males and females.
2a. Compare and Contrast How are the nervous
system and the endocrine system different?
b. Apply Concepts Describe an example of a stimulus and response that involves your sense of hearing.
I know that the	system and	system work
	together to        	
Homeostasis
How Does Your Body Stay in Balance?
Worried Sick—Not Just an Expression
Starting in the 1980s, scientists began to gather
evidence that stress can affect the immune system. For example, the graph below shows the relationship
between the length of time a person is stressed and the risk of catching a cold when exposed to a virus. Today, scientists know that high levels of stress and long periods of stress can increase a person's risk for many diseases.
Therefore, managing stress is an important part of a healthy lifestyle. Many activities, including hanging out with friends, getting enough sleep, and exercising moderately, can help lower stress levels.
Read Graphs Use the graph to answer the questions.
1. Summarize the information given in the graph.
2. What do you do to manage stress?
-low Does Your Body stay
n Balance?
t may be summer or winter. You may be indoors or outdoors. You nay be running or sitting still. Regardless, your internal body emperature is almost exactly 37°C. The conditions outside your )ody may change. But the conditions inside your body stay stable, )r steady. Most of these conditions, including the chemical makeup )f your cells, their water content, and your body temperature, stay
tbout the same.
Homeostasis The condition in which an organism's nternal environment is kept stable in spite of changes in the )utside environment is called homeostasis. Keeping this balance is necessary for an organism to function properly and survive. CM All of your body systems working together maintain homeostasis and keep the body in balance.
FIGURE 1 	
Keeping Warm in the Cold
The clothes on this snowboarder help keep him warm. But his body is working hard, too. His nervous, circulatory, and muscular systems work together,
keeping his body warm.
Describe Think of a time when you were really hot or really cold. Describe the changes you felt as your body adjusted to that condition.
Maintaining Homeostasis You experience homeostasis in action when you shiver, sweat, or feel hungry, full, or thirsty. Your nervous and endocrine systems control these responses. Other systems, including the digestive, respiratory, circulatory, and muscular systems, also play roles in your body's responses.
Regulating Temperature When you are cold, your nervous system signals your muscles to make you shiver. Shivering produces heat that helps keep you warm. As explained in the diagram below, when you warm up, shivering stops. When you are too warm, your endocrine system releases hormones that make you perspire. As the sweat evaporates, your body cools. The circulatory system and skin also help regulate temperature. Changes in the amount of blood flow in the skin can help prevent heat loss or carry heat away. In this way, your body temperature stays steady.
Meeting Energy Needs If your body needs more energy, hormones from the endocrine system signal the nervous system to make you feel hungry. After you eat, other hormones tell your brain to make you feel full. Other body systems are also involved.
For example, your muscular system helps move food through your digestive system. Your respiratory system takes in the oxygen that is used in cells to release energy from food.
FIGURE 2 	
Hungry or Not?
Signals between your nervous system and your digestive system control your feelings of hunger.
. Sequence Fill in the missing steps in the cycle diagram.
Maintaining Water Balance Life depends on water. All the chemical reactions that keep you alive happen within the watery environment of your cells. If your body needs more water, you feel thirsty. The water you drink passes from your digestive system into your circulatory system. Excess water leaves your body through your excretory system when you exhale, sweat, and urinate.
Keeping Your Balance You know that you hear with your ears. But did you know your ears also help you keep your balance? Structures in your inner ear sense the position of your head. They send this
information to your brain, which interprets
the signals. If your brain senses that you
are losing your balance, it sends messages
to your muscles to move in ways that
help you stay steady, as in Figure 3.
Complete the cause-and-effect table below to help you organize what you have learned about homeostasis.
FIGURE 3 	
Balancing Act
Signals from this diver's ears to her brain lead to movements that help her balance on the edge of the diving board.
Name What systems of the diver's body play a role in keeping her balanced on her toes?
FIGURE 4 	
Stressed Out?
Different people view stress differently.
% Use the photos to complete these tasks.
1. Interpret Photos Using numbers 1-4, rank these activities, in your opinion, from least stressful (1) to most stressful (4).
2, CHALLENGE Which activity could be very
stressful or not stressful at all? Explain.
Responding to Stress Imagine you are out for a walk. Suddenly, a big, snarling dog jumps in front of you! Your endocrine system instantly pumps the hormone adrenaline into your bloodstream, making your heart beat faster and your breathing rate increase. These changes prepare your body for whatever may happen next. You may feel these same changes when you start a race or get ready to make a speech in class. In general, stress is the reaction of your body to possibly threatening, challenging, or uncomfortable events.
Some stress is normal and healthy. If stress is over quickly, your body returns to a healthier condition. However, too much stress can be unhealthy. Ongoing stress can disrupt homeostasis. For example, it can disrupt your body's ability to fight disease. It also can cause depression, headaches, digestion problems, heart
problems, and other health issues. Managing stress is an important part of a healthy lifestyle.
_qommunicate A soccer game, a music recital, a class presentation, and many other events can cause stress. Think of an event from your life when you felt stress. Describe how your body responded during the event, and then after the event or when the stress went away.
Fighting Disease When your body systems are in balance, you are
healthy. However, bacteria and viruses that cause disease can disrupt homeostasis and make you sick. Think about the last time you had a
cold or influenza (the flu). You may have had a fever and less energy. You also may have slept more than usual. Over a few days, your immune system probably fought off the disease.
The immune system includes specialized cells that can attack and destroy viruses. When you are sick, these cells temporarily increase in number. Fighting infection sometimes causes your body temperature to go up. It also uses extra energy. As you get well, your fever goes away and your energy comes back. If you are sick for more than a few days, you may need medical attention to help your body fight the infection and become healthy again.
Systems in Action
How does your body work?
FIGURE 5 	
mtrcrt^tilautilil The body systems of this runner work together as she pushes herself to excel.
Apply Concepts Read the descriptions of functions happening in the runner's body. Then identify the main systems involved.
Sweat appears on the surface of the runner's skin, and carbon dioxide moves rapidly out of her lungs. Cell wastes move into her blood and are filtered by her kidneys.
Food from the runner's breakfast has been broken down into nutrients and is delivered to cells.
The runner's brain interprets what her eyes see and directs her movements.
Hormones move through the runner's bloodstream, stimulating her body systems to work harder.
la. Define What is homeostasis?
The runner's breathing rate and heart rate increase, supplying more oxygen to her muscle cells.
b. List Give four examples of conditions in your body that are related to maintaining homeostasis.
C. Relate Cause and Effect Give an example of how stress can affect homeostasis.
d. v34„,sw,,,p) How does your body work?
9 Use what you have learned about II how your body systems function to write your answer.
The runner's legs lift her off the ground and over the hurdle.
I get it! Now I know that maintaining homeostasis depends on
The Skeletal System
What Does the Skeleton Do?
What Role Do Joints Play?
What Are the Characteristics of Bones?
Know Your Bones!
ere are some fascinating facts you may not know about your bones.
•	You have the same number of bones in your neck as a giraffe. However, a single bone in the neck of a giraffe can be as long as 25 centimeters.
•	You have 27 bones in each hand and 26 bones in each foot. They account for 106 of the 206 bones in your body.
•	You do not have a funny bone. You have a sensitive spot on your elbow where a nerve passes close to the skin. If you hit this spot, the area feels funny.
•	No one is truly "double-jointed." People who are able to twist in weird directions have very flexible joints.
Communicate Discuss the question with a partner. Then write your answer below.
Why do you think it is helpful for your hand to have 27 bones?
What Does the Skeleton Do?
If you have ever visited a construction site, you have seen workers assemble steel pieces into a rigid frame for a building. Once the building is finished, this framework is invisible.
Like a building, you have an inner framework. Your framework, or skeleton, is made up of all the bones in your body. Just as a building would fall without its frame, you would collapse without your skeleton. CM Your skeleton has five major functions. It provides shape and support, enables you to move, and protects your organs. It also produces blood cells and stores minerals and other materials until your body needs them.
Shape and Support Your skeleton shapes and supports your body. It is made up of about 206 bones of different shapes
and sizes. Your backbone, or vertebral column, is the center of your skeleton. A total of 26 small bones, or vertebrae (vuR tuh bray) (singular vertebra), make up your backbone. Figure 1 shows how vertebrae connect to form the backbone or vertebral column.
FIGURE 1 	
The Vertebral Column
Just like a flexible necklace of beads, your vertebrae move against each other, allowing you to bend
and twist.
Use the photo to answer the questions about your vertebrae.
1. Interpret Photos Which body parts does the vertebral column support?
2,ClnIAI.LENGE What is the advantage of having large
vertebrae at the base of the vertebral column?
Movement and Protection Your skeleton, as the one shown in Figure 2, allows you to move. Most of the body's bones
are associated with muscles, which pull on the bones to make
them move. Bones also protect many of the organs in your
body. For example, your skull protects your brain.
Production and Storage of Substances
Some of your bones produce substances that your body needs. For example, tissues in the long bones of your arms and legs make certain blood cells. Bones also store
minerals, such as calcium. When the body needs these
minerals, the bones release small amounts of them
into the blood.
FIGURE 2	
61=12:3 The Skeleton
%Complete the activity below and answer the questions.
1. Identify Draw a path to show how the tibia connects to the vertebral column. Which bones did you draw a path through?
2. Predict How would your movement change if your backbone were one long bone?
I know that my skeleton	
What Role Do Joints Play?
If your leg had only one long bone, how would you get out of bed? Luckily, your leg has many bones so you can move it easily. A joint is a place where two bones come together. GM Joints allow
bones to move in different ways. You have two kinds of joints: immovable and movable.
Immovable  Joints Immovable joints connect bones but allow little or no movement. The bones of the skull are held together by immovable joints.
Movable Joints Most joints are movable. They allow the body to make many different movements such as those
shown in Figure 3. The bones in movable joints are held together by ligaments, which are made of strong connective tissue.
Infer What would happen if your skull bones had movable joints?
FIGURE 3	
GEMagini Movable Joints
Movable joints allow you to move in different ways.
• _Alassify Write the name of another joint of each type on the line in each box.
Ball-and-Socket Joint
This joint allows the greatest range of motion. Your hip has a ball-and-socket joint that allows you to swing your leg in a circle.
Hinge Joint
This joint allows forward or backward motion. Your knee is a hinge joint that allows you to bend and straighten your leg.
Gliding Joint
This joint allows one bone to slide over another. YOU! wrist has a gliding joint that allows it to bend and flex.
Pivot Joint
This joint allows one bone to rotate around another bone. You use this joint to turn your arm at your elbow side-to-side.
Without movable joints, your body would be as stiff as a board.
4, Observe Perform each activity below. Write the type of joint you use.
Move your arm from the shoulder in a circle. 	
Move your wrist to wave. 	
Turn your head from side to side. 	
Classify In the chart, write the name of the type of joint each object has.
0 Apply Concepts What type of joint do you have in your toes? Explain your answer.
la. Explain Why does your body need both immovable and movable joints?
b. Relate Cause and Effect How would your legs move if your knees were ball-and-socket joints?
Now I know that joints
What Are the Characteristics
of Bones?
The word skeleton comes from the Greek words meaning "a dried body." This suggests that a skeleton is dead, but bones are not dead at all. (Z Bones are complex living structures that grow, develop and repair themselves. Bones are also strong and lightweight.
Bones are made up of bone tissue, blood vessels, and nerves.
A thin, tough outer membrane covers all of a typical bone except
the ends. Beneath the membrane is a thick layer of compact bone, which is hard and dense but not solid. Compact bone contains minerals that give bones strength. Small canals in the compact bone carry blood vessels and nerves from the bone's surface to its living cells.
Long bones, such as the femur in Figure 4, have a layer of spongy bone at the ends and under the compact bone. The small spaces within spongy bone make it lightweight but still strong. Bone also has two types of soft connective tissue called marrow. Red bone marrow fills the spaces in some of your spongy bone. It produces most of your blood cells. Yellow bone marrow is found in a space
in the middle of the bone. It stores fat.
FIGURE 4 	
Bone Structure
Many tissues make up the femur, the body's longest bone.
4, Relate Text and Visuals Write notes to describe each part of the bone and what it does.
sa Summarize Write a summary about the characteristics of bones.
Bone Strength Bone is both strong and lightweight. Bones can absorb more force without breaking than concrete or granite rock can. Yet bones weigh much less than those materials. In fact, only about 20 percent of an average adult's body weight
is bone. Bone feels as hard as a rock because it is made of tightly packed minerals—mainly phosphorus and calcium.
Bone Growth Because bones are alive, they form new bone tissue as you grow. Your bones are growing longer now, making you taller. Even after you are fully grown, bone tissue continues to form. For example, every time you play soccer or basketball, some of your bones absorb the force of your weight. They respond by making new bone tissue. New bone tissue also forms when a bone breaks.
Bone Development When you were born, most of your bones were cartilage. Cartilage is a strong connective tissue that is more flexible than bone. As you grew, most of that cartilage was replaced with bone. Some cartilage still protects the ends
of your bones. You also have cartilage in your ears and at the tip of your nose.
Infer Infants are born with soft spots in their skull made out of cartilage. What do you think happens to softs spot over time?
Healthy Bones A combination of a balanced diet and regular exercise are important for healthy bones. A balanced diet includes foods that contain enough calcium and phosphorus to keep your bones strong while they are growing. You should eat dairy products; meats; whole grains; and green, leafy vegetables.
Exercise helps build and maintain strong bones. During activities such as running and dancing, your bones support the weight of your entire body. These weight-bearing activities help your bones grow stronger. However, to prevent injury, always wear appropriate safety equipment when exercising.
As you age, your bones start to lose some minerals. This
mineral loss can lead to osteoporosis (ahs tee oh puh ROH sis),
a condition in which bones become weak and break easily. You can see how osteoporosis causes the spaces in a bone to become larger, reducing its density and strength in Figure 5.
FIGURE 5 	
Osteoporosis
Regular exercise and a diet rich in calcium with vitamin D can help prevent osteoporosis later in life.
. Compare and Contrast The photos show two bones. Label the healthy bone and the bone with osteoporosis. Then explain your choices.
2a. Explain How do eating a balanced diet and exercising regularly help your bones?
b. Apply Concepts How do you know that bone is living tissue?
) I get it! Now I know that my bones are _
The Muscular System
What Muscles Are in Your Body? How Do Skeletal Muscles Work?
Posted by: Will
ocation: Moore, Oklahoma
I hurt my shoulder while
participating in tackling
drills during football
practice. The doctor said I had
a deep muscle contusion, which is a bruise deep in a muscle. I was unable to lift my right arm for more than a week because of the injury. I had to take three tablets of ibuprofen every day for two
• eeks because it helped the swelling
go down. I missed playing in
only one game, and the pain
eventually went away.
1.What are two things Will had to do because of his injury?
2.What can you do to avoid being injured when playing sports?
What Muscles Are in Your Body?
Try to sit without moving any muscles. Can you do it? First,
you probably need to breathe, so your chest expands to let air in. Then you swallow. Breathing and swallowing involve muscles, so it is impossible to sit still without any muscle movement.
Involuntary and Voluntary Muscles Some body
movements, such as smiling, are easy to control. Other movements, such as breathing, are impossible to control completely. That
is because some of your muscles are not under your conscious control. Those muscles are involuntary muscles. Involuntary muscles are responsible for other activities such as digesting food. The muscles under your conscious control are voluntary muscles. Smiling, writing, and getting out of your seat when the bell rings are all actions controlled by voluntary muscles.
FIGURE 1 	
Muscle Use
Some muscles are voluntary and others are involuntary.
%Relate Text and Visuals Write how the person in each frame is using involuntary and voluntary muscles.
FIGURE 2 	
Muscle Tissue
You have three types of muscle tissue: skeletal, smooth, and cardiac.
4 Classify In the table, identify the type of muscle tissue in each body structure.
Skeletal Muscle Skeletal muscle cells appear banded, or striated, so they are sometimes called striated muscle (STRY ay tid). Skeletal muscle allows your body to react quickly. However, it also tires quickly.
Types of Muscle Tissue CM Your body has skeletal, smooth, and cardiac muscle tissues. Some of these muscle tissues are involuntary, and some are voluntary.
Skeletal muscles provide the force that moves your bones. A strong connective tissue called a tendon attaches the muscle
to a bone. Because you have conscious control of skeletal muscles, they are classified as voluntary muscles. In contrast, the inside of many internal body organs, such as the stomach and blood vessels, contain smooth muscle tissue. These are involuntary muscles. They work to control certain movements inside your body,
such as moving food through your digestive system. The tissue called cardiac muscle is found only in your heart. Like smooth muscle, cardiac muscle is involuntary. Look at Figure 2.
Cardiac Muscle Like skeletal muscle cells, cardiac muscle cells are striated. But unlike skeletal muscle, cardiac muscle does not tire. It can contract repeatedly. You call those repeated contractions heartbeats.
Smooth Muscle Smooth muscle cells are not striated. This type of muscle reacts and tires slowly.
Why do you shiver when you get chilled? You shiver when many of your skeletal muscles
contract quickly again and again. When your muscles contract, they produce extra heat. So, by shivering, your body produces heat that warms you.
4e Compare and Contrast In the graphic organizer, write how all three muscle tissues are alike and how each type is different.
la. Define What is the difference between
voluntary and involuntary muscles?
b. 4,..fer Why is it important that cardiac muscle tissue does not tire?
Jow I know that the muscles in my body are	
FIGURE 3 	
- ART IN MOTION Muscle Pairs To bend your arm at the elbow, the biceps contracts while the triceps relaxes.
. Interpret Diagrams Tell what happens to each muscle as you straighten your arm.
How Do Skeletal Muscles Work?
Has anyone ever asked you to "make a muscle"? If so, you probably tightened your fist, bent your arm at the elbow, and made the muscles in your upper arm bulge, or contract. Like other skeletal muscles, the muscles in your arm do their work by contracting, which means becoming shorter and thicker.
Working in Pairs Each time you move, more than one muscle is involved. C= Skeletal muscles work in pairs. Muscle cells can only contract, not lengthen. While one muscle in a pair contracts, the other muscle in the pair relaxes to its original length. The biceps and triceps shown in Figure 3 are an example of a pair of sketetal muscles in your upper arm.
This girl's biceps and triceps work as a pair.
0 Apply Concepts Below each photo, write which muscle is contracted.
What might happen if the biceps could not contract?
Keeping Muscles Healthy Regular exercise is important for maintaining the strength and flexibility of muscles. Exercise makes individual muscle cells grow bigger, so the whole muscle becomes thicker and stronger. Warming up before exercising increases the blood flow to your muscles. Stretching as you warm up helps your muscles become more flexible and prepares them for exercise. Exercise is important even in space, as shown in Figure 4.
Sometimes, muscles can become injured. A muscle strain can occur when muscles are overworked or overstretched. After a long period of exercise, a skeletal muscle can cramp, or contract and stay contracted. If you injure a muscle, be sure to follow medical instructions and rest the injured area so it can heal properly.
FIGURE 4 	
Muscle Loss
Without gravity, astronauts in space can lose muscle
mass. Therefore, they need to exercise daily.
CHALLENGE Explain why a lack of gravity might cause muscles to weaken.
2a. Review How do muscles work in pairs?
b. Make Generalizations Why is it important to exercise both muscles in a pair?
Now I know that skeletal muscles work ___
The Skin
What Are the Functions
and Structures of the Skin?
Would You Like to Be a Skin Doctor?
Did you know that there is a special type of doctor who studies and treats skin? This type of doctor, a dermatologist,
specializes in caring for skin, hair, and nails. Dermatologists diagnose and treat a variety of skin problems ranging from acne to psoriasis to dangerous cancers.
To become a dermatologist, you need
a lot of education. You may spend
about ten years in schooling and training after you graduate high school. Then
you must pass a certification test. Although becoming a dermatologist is not easy, it can be a rewarding career!
Communicate Discuss the question with a partner. Then write down your answer.
Why do you think dermatologists are important?
What Are the Functions
and Structures of the Skin?
If an adult's skin were stretched out flat, it would cover an area about the size of a mattress on a twin bed. The skin is part of the integumentary system (in teg yoo MEN tur ee). In addition to the skin, this system includes hair, nails, sweat glands, and oil glands.
Functions of the Skin Your skin helps you in many ways. = The skin has two layers that protect the body. Skin helps regulate body temperature, eliminate wastes, gather information about the environment, and produce vitamin D.
Protecting the Body The skin forms a barrier that keeps harmful substances outside the body. It also keeps important substances such as water and other fluids inside the body.
Maintaining Temperature The skin helps the body maintain
a steady temperature. When you become too warm, like the runner in Figure 1, blood vessels in your skin enlarge. This widening
of the vessels allows more blood to flow through them and body heat to escape into the environment. In addition, sweat glands produce perspiration in response to excess heat. As perspiration evaporates from your skin, your skin is cooled. When you get cold, blood vessels in your body contract. This reduces blood flow to the skin and helps your body conserve heat.
FIGURE 1 	
Amazing Skin
As this runner exercises, his skin helps to cool him off.
. Describe On the notebook page, describe a time that your skin protected you, maintained your body temperature, or both.
'a Relate Cause and Effect Describe the possible effect
of not getting enough sunlight each day.
Eliminating Wastes Perspiration contains dissolved waste materials that come from the breakdown of chemical processes. Your skin helps eliminate wastes whenever you perspire.
Gathering Information Nerves in your skin gather information from the environment. They provide information about things such as pressure, temperature, and pain. Pain messages warn you that something in your surroundings can injure you.
Producing Vitamin D Some skin cells produce vitamin D in the presence of sunlight. Vitamin D is important for healthy bones because it helps your body absorb the calcium in your food. Your skin cells need sunlight each day to produce enough vitamin D.
FIGURE 2 	
Skin at Work
You may not notice that your skin is constantly working. Complete the activity and answer the questions below.
1. Interpret Photos Write below each photo the functions that the skin performs.
2. _Observe Press down firmly on your arm
with your fingertips. Then lightly pinch yourself. What information did you receive?
3.1 CHALLENGE What might happen if the nerves in your skin did not gather information?
Structures of the Skin The skin has two main
layers, as shown in Figure 3. Together, these layers—an outer layer and an inner layer—perform all the skin's functions.
The epidermis is the outer layer of the skin. Deep in the epidermis, new cells form. As they mature, they move upward until they die. They then become part of the epidermal surface layer. This surface layer helps protect your skin. Cells stay in this layer for about two to three weeks until they are shed. Some cells deep in the epidermis produce melanin, a pigment that colors the skin.
The dermis is the inner layer of the skin. It is above a layer of fat. This fat layer pads the internal organs and helps
keep heat in the body. The dermis includes
nerves, blood vessels, sweat glands.
hairs, and oil glands. Pores are
openings that allow sweat to
reach the surface. Strands of
hair grow within the dermis
in follicles (FAHL ih kulz).
Oil produced in glands
around the follicles keeps the
surface of the skin moist and
the hairs flexible.
FIGURE 3 	
Structures of the Skin
Relate Text and Visuals On the lines, write the functions of the epidermis, the nerves, and the sweat gland.
la. Describe How does your skin gather information about the environment?
b. Summarize Explain how some structures in the skin protect your body.
Now I know that the skin has two layers that 	
Cells, tissues, and organs make up organ    , which constantly interact
to help maintain
=The levels of organization in the human body consist of cells, tissues, organs, and organ systems.
(;;) Muscles, bones, and nerves work together to make your body move.
C21 The circulatory, respiratory, digestive, and excretory systems play key roles in moving materials in your body.
0 The nervous system and the endocrine system work together to control body functions.
CM All of your body systems working together maintain homeostasis and keep the body in balance.
CM Your skeleton provides shape and support, enables you to move, protects your organs, produces blood cells, and stores minerals.
Joints allow bones to move in different ways.
`-.= Bones are complex living structures that grow, develop, and repair themselves.
(2) The skin has two layers that protect the body. Skin helps regulate body temperature, eliminate wastes, and produce vitamin D.
CM Your body has skeletal, smooth, and cardiac muscle tissues. Some of these muscle tissues are involuntary, and some are voluntary.
T.: 1;d) Skeletal muscles work in pairs. Muscle cells only contract, not lengthen. While one muscle in a pair contracts, the other muscle relaxes.









It happens all the time—you are watching a movie, or sitting in class, and you realize your leg has "fallen asleep." At first it's
numb, and you may have trouble moving it. But gradually, the sensation of feeling comes back—painfully. Your leg feels like it's being poked with pins and needles!
When a body part, such as your arm or leg, falls asleep, your nervous system is not working properly. A nerve or several nerves have been compressed. The pins and needles are a sort of warning sign. Eventually, a compressed nerve could become damaged.
How does this warning sign work? Nerves carry sensory information to your brain. They also carry signals that control the movement of body parts. When your leg or arm is compressed, these signals are disrupted and your limb "falls asleep."
At first, nerve cells send confused sensory information to the brain. But gradually, the nerve cells stop sending signals, making your limb numb. When you move and the pathways between your brain and your limb
start working again, your nerves become very excitable. The more you stimulate them—by moving or shaking a sleeping limb—the
more excitable the nerves become. The very excitable nerves cause the feeling of "pins and needles."
=i2 Pins and needles can sometimes be a sign of more serious nervous system problems. Research one condition, such
as carpal tunnel syndrome, that can cause this symptom. Make a pamphlet describing prevention, warning signs, and treatment of the condition.
Look at your hand or face=1.
you can easily see different tissues. Your skin, nails, hair, eyes, and teeth are all made of different types of cells. Like those of all mammals, our body has more than 200 different types of cells, each with
a specialized function or job. Yet all these different cells developed from just one fertilized egg cell.
How does one cell multiply into many specialized cells? When an embryo first starts to develop, the original fertilized cell divides. As cell division continues, a clustered mass organizes into a hollow ball called a blastula. Eventually, the multiplying cells differentiate into three layers. The inner layer becomes the digestive tract and respiratory system. The middle layer gives rise to most of the other organs and internal structures. The outer layer becomes sense organs, nerves, and skin.
Cells that have the ability to divide into other, more specialized cells are called stem cells. The processes that stimulate stem cells to change involve chemicals, enzymes, and hormones, and those processes are directed by an organism's DNA.
Scientists have tracked many stages of the growth of embryos and the process of one kind of cell differentiating into different types of cells. Yet many of the exact causes of cell differentiation remain unknown. The process is the subject of intense research.
Analyze It Choose a body system.
Identify the specialized cells that make
up different tissues in that system. Make
a poster that describes the types of cells
in the system, their specialized jobs, and how their structure helps them carry out their function in supporting your growth and survival.
How do systems of the body move and manage materials?
Traffic flows back and forth through a city in all directions, carrying people and goods where they need to go. Like the
traffic of a city, your blood flows throughout your body. Some materials "ride" your bloodstream to places in the body where they are used. Other materials get
delivered to organs that remove what you don't need. And all the while, your blood keeps things moving.
Infer What would you like to know about the materials that are moved within your body?
