











	





















	




	
















Schools around the world are teaming up
to help scientists at the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA). Since 1998, students have been helping NASA check satellite observations through a project called Students' Cloud Observations On-Line (S'COOL).
NASA tells schools in the program the date and time when the project satellites will be passing over different regions of the world. When a satellite passes over their school,
students observe the clouds in the sky. Students can also measure weather data such as temperature and relative humidity. These observations are uploaded to the project Web site. Then NASA scientists compare the satellite data with the students' observations. This process, called ground truthing, helps scientists determine how accurate the satellite data are.
Students' observations are compared to
data collected by satellites like this one.
Schools around the world participate in the S'COOL program. The map above shows where they are. If you had to recruit schools
to help NASA get complete data, where would you look for schools?
11=3 Make a record book. Use it to keep a weeklong log of cloud formations and weather conditions, including photos or sketches, at a specific time each day.
Do you understand the important bulletin on the computer screen? Lines of latitude and longitude are imaginary lines that crisscross Earth's surface. Because the lines cross, they can help you describe any location on Earth, including the location of hurricanes. A location's latitude is always written before its longitude.
Hurricane Hilda is located in the Atlantic Ocean off the southeastern coast of the United States.
Write About It Assume that Hurricane Hilda is following a straight path. Using the information in the bulletin and the map, try to predict the path the hurricane will take to reach land, and how long it will take to get there. Compare your predicted path with the path of a real hurricane. Evaluate your prediction. Does the bulletin provide enough information for you to make a precise prediction? Write a paragraph explaining why or why not
Hurricane Hilda is currently located at 30° N, 74° W. You can plot the hurricane's location on a map. What information do you need to predict where it will reach land?
What factors affect Earth's climate?
On this icy, frozen island in Svalbard, Norway, the sun shines all day and night from mid-April to mid-August. Winter
is long and cold, with three months of complete darkness. The average winter temperature is -12°C. But the average annual precipitation, mainly snow, is only about 20 centimeters. The island is located above the Arctic Circle, and
scientists study glaciers, the environment, and meteorology there to detect climate changes.
_Qe ve I op Hypotheses How might this island climate in Norway be different from your climate?
