



















High school students came up with the names-Spirit and Opportunity-and scientists at the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) came up with the plan. Mars is too far away for humans to explore directly. So robot rovers would be dropped onto the surface of Mars and do the exploring for us. The rovers landed on Mars in January 2004. Their assignment was to collect images that would help answer the question: Was there ever water on Mars and could there have been life?
Chemical and physical data from the rovers suggested that there once was water on Mars. The rovers found evidence of erosion as well as of chemicals that would exist in an acidic lake or hot springs. Then, in 2015, NASA's Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter found evidence of flowing liquid water on Mars even today. It is still impossible to know for sure whether life ever existed on Mars.
Organize It	.	2.-
on. Organize the information in the articles into a two-column chart. In one column, list any data about Mars described in the articles. In the second column, list any conclusions that scientists made about Mars based on that evidence. Circle any conclusions that were confirmed by later Mars missions. Ai
Even the planets flying through the solar
system have to obey the law! Gravitational forces determine the ways in which objects move throughout the solar system. In the early 1600s, Johannes Kepler proposed three laws to describe how these forces affect the motion of the planets in
orbit around the sun. Kepler's
first law of planetary motion
states that all planets orbit the sun in
a path that resembles an ellipse, with the
sun located at one of the ellipse's two foci.
Kepler's second law uses a mathematical formula to describe the speed at which planets orbit the sun. Planets travel fastest when they are moving along the sun side of the ellipse. They travel more slowly along the opposite side of the ellipse. In his third law, Kepler was able to demonstrate that by
knowing a planet's period of revolution, the planet's distance from the sun can be calculated. The formulas in Kepler's laws are still used to describe the motion of planets and other satellites.
Model It You can make an ellipse using a pencil, a string,
a sheet of paper, two pushpins, and a piece of cardboard. First, use two pushpins to fasten the sheet of paper to the cardboard. Next, tie the string into a loose loop around the two pins. The loop should have plenty of slack. Pull the string tight with your pencil tip. The string should form a triangle with the pencil and pins at its three corners. Then, trace out a path with the pencil, pulling the string along the farthest possible path from the pins. The resulti - shape will be an ellipse.
A The two foci that anchor Earth's elliptical path are almost directly on top of each other. This makes Earth's orbit almost circular. The orbits of the outer planets are more strongly elliptical.
How do astronomers learn about distant
objects in the universe?
Two galaxies are colliding! It all started
40 million years ago and will take millions
more for these two spiral galaxies to
actually combine. Astronomers know that
the galaxy on the left, NGC 2207, and
the galaxy on the right, IC 2163, are
140 million light-years from Earth. A light-year is the distance light travels in one year, or 9.46 trillion kilometers. That makes these galaxies about 1,320,000,000,000,000,000,000 kilometers away. Infer How can astronomers see so far into space?
