





















































In June 2008, large portions of Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Michigan, Minnesota, Missouri, and Wisconsin were under water. Weeks of rain and spring melting caused rivers in these states to overflow their banks
and flood the surrounding flood plains. Where water broke through levees, families were evacuated, roads closed, and several counties were declared disaster zones. Farmland, homes, and businesses located
on flood plains suffered billions of dollars' worth of damage.
We can't control the weather. When melting snow and heavy rains cause rivers to flood, some of the
water may overflow onto undeveloped riverbanks and wetlands. In these places, the soil absorbs some of the water, and trees and other plants often survive the damage. But when rivers flood houses, streets, and businesses, the water can't drain. It destroys homes and businesses, causing huge amounts of damage.
At least ten million households in the United States are located on flood plains. Levees and dams protect some communities. In others, public officials make laws to prevent building on flood plains. To encourage communities to take action, the government offers flood insurance for cities and towns that take steps to reduce flood damage. We cannot stop the rain from falling or the rivers from flooding, but we can take new approaches to reduce the damage.
Mars is a pretty cool place. Gusts of wind blow frosty sand dunes around and cause strange streaks of sand and frost. When the Mars Rovers arrived on Mars in 2004, scientists at the National Aeronautics and Space Administration got their first chance to learn about wind and erosion on another planet. The rovers captured pictures of grains of Martian sand (called "blueberries" by the scientists) and of the patterns of dust and rock on the surface of Mars. From these pictures, scientists learned a lot about wind erosion.
By measuring these Martian blueberries and recording where they landed on the surface, scientists could estimate how strong Martian winds must be. Looking at the patterns of sand and bare rock, they could tell which directions the winds on Mars blow. Data showed that they blow from either the northwest or the southeast.
Scientists used all their measuring, counting, and other observations to design a computer model. The model can describe what happens to a planet's sandy surface when the wind starts blowing. By counting millions of blueberries on Mars, scientists are learning how to track wind erosion anywhere in the solar system!
C=213 Dr. Douglas Jerolmack is a geophysicist who helped prove there is wind on Mars. Research Dr. Jerolmack's observations. Write a paragraph giving reasons why Dr. Jerolmack's scientific claims are considered to be valid (true).
Scientists measured "blueberries"—grains of Martian sand and dust.
Long ago, a fly got stuck in resin from a tree. Today, that fly is a fossil that scientists can study. It's a clue to what Earth was like on the day the fly got stuck.
Develop Hypotheses What do you think scientists can learn from fossils like this?
